Dear friends, colleagues and members of the
open source community, welcome to the UN
headquarter, welcome to the UN open source
week, we're very happy, we're very glad to
see you all again,we're thrilled to
welcome you,this is a five day event where
we come
together to celebrate and promote the
values of open source.
Openness, collaboration, shared innovations
is at the heart of open source as you all
know andat the heart of the values of some
of the values that
UN is promoting globally.
Open source, digital public good, digital
public infrastructure are foundational in
our digital world, so we all here coming
together to celebrate that.
The best thing about open source as, and you
know that, that everybody can contribute,
but the worst thing about open source is
that everyone can contribute.
So we're very happy,we're very happy of
the diversity we have here
you're coming from
over 40 countries and that what makes this
event very special and makes us very happy
to welcome you here today.
As you know, this week is about the people,
the people WHO believe that code should be
shared, ideas should be open and bugs,
someone else's problem, right?
So on Monday and Tuesday, we had an action
packed innovation heavy two days.
I recognize some of the, of the, of the
organizers here and some of the participants.
We had this Edithathon,Menteathon
andHackathon,very successful and
we are very happy with
the, some incredible solution that we got
and we had people improve widely used tool
by our colleagues of UNICEF and we got
some incredible solutions.
Twenty two teams, yeah, came also from all
over WHO worked on that.
And those three things, Menteathon, Hackathon,
they, they cover the three activities, the
core pillars of digital transformation.
So strengthening the open source
infrastructure,the Menteathon
safeguarding the integrity
of information online,the Edithathon and
fostering inclusive collaboration is the
Hackathon.
And today we kick off our third edition of
OSPO, OSPO for Good.
So this is our third year.
Please raise your hand if you came in the
first year.
Please raise your hand if you came to the
second year.
Wow. Okay, this one is harder, raise your
hand if you attended both.
Oh, wow. Thank you. Thank you.
So it was a very packed year for us here
at the UN where we release our open source
repository with, we release our open source
catalog, we issued our common open source
policy framework and more importantly, we
issued the UN open source principles.
Okay,last show of hand,WHO here is
representing an organization that
adopted the open source
principles. Thank you.
With that is my privilege to hand over to
Mr. Menteep Singh Gill, the Undersecretary
General andSpecial Envoy for
Digital Immersion Technology to deliver
conference opening remarks.
Thank you, Omar, and thank you everyone
for being with us today.
It's an absolute pleasure.
It's great to see throughthe show of hands
and
through your presence today how this event
has grown over the past three years.
You know, I remember our first moment
together.
It started as a small, intimate gathering
of enthusiasts, open source enthusiasts.
And it felt like a working session.
And at thattime in parallel in this
building,we were working on consultations for
the Global
Digital Compact across different regions,
across different stakeholder communities.
And then last year,when we gathered as
a larger group of people focused on the
growing
role of open source program officers in
governments andinstitutions around the world
in parallel
the negotiations on the Global Digital
Compact had started.
And today in 2025, as we meet at a larger
scale, we are at a critical moment.
The Global Digital Compact was adopted
last year in September by the UN member
states.
And it's a milestone in how we look at
international cooperation on digital and
emerging technologies.
And we didn't start from scratch because 20
years ago, we came together in Tunis at the
World Summit on Information Society and
adopted a defining document whose 20th
anniversary
we celebrate this year.
And what we did withthe Global Digital
Compact,what you all did with
the Global Digital Compact
is move to, let's say, the next version of
the software for cooperation around digital
and emerging technologies.
These five objectives frombridging the
digital divide and
accelerating progress on the sustainable
development goals,all the way to governing
AI forhumanity
that's an interlocking comprehensive
modern agenda on digital and emerging
technologies.
The GDC also led to the establishment of
the office,the Office forDigital and
Emerging
Technologies that I have to, I have the
honor to lead at this point in time.
And importantly fromour perspective asopen
source enthusiasts
it recognized the critical
value thatopen source digital public goods
and
digital public infrastructure play in
advancing
and inclusive digital transformation and
building an inclusive digital economy.
So this year aswe celebrate the open
source week
we have a more comprehensive agenda.
So a full week of programming reflects the
diverse, powerful and growing role of open
source in shaping digital cooperation and
digital transformation.
We started on Monday,so the past two
days,in the UN deck over,participants from
across
the world came together to address
critical challenges.
You created new solutions,improved the
reliability of information online and
worked to ensure
as Omar was saying,the foundational
infrastructure of the digital world is maintain
andstrengthen.
So we saw the full cycle of open source in
action, create, maintain, sustain.
I won't take a moment to reflect on the
incredible work,the dynamic moments that
we witnessed
in the same room through the maintenance
on the editor on and the hacker on.
So remarkable impact during the editor on
the participants created six new articles
and edited 234 existing ones,resulting in
I'm told more than 30,000 edits
all focused
on topics related to the UN and its mission
around digital and emerging technologies,
a dedicated group of more than 37 editors
contributed several thousand words and
their
collective efforts reached a global
audience of nearly two million views.
So the power of collaboration just over a
day.
Meanwhile
the maintenance on brought together over
40 plus participants across 15 plus
breakout
sessions,diving deep intoopen source
software andlife cycle fromlicensing and
governance.
These sessions were hands on andcollaboratively
guided by senior maintainers and
produced actionable
insights on critical topics like AI
andOSS,contributor recognition,fair labor and
security.
And then in the ahead of the storm
hackathon
81 hackers took over the UN headquarters
UN takeover to tackle three ambitious
challenges proposed by our colleagues at
UNICEF related
to children and focused on climate and
risk data.
From forecasting extreme weather impacts
on children
to solving complex geo data puzzles
to making risk data actionable throughgeo
site innovations
participants brought together
creativity, collaboration and technical
excellence to the forefront.
The solutions developed during the hackathon
will be used by UNICEF colleagues to
advance
their work on these critical challenges.
So congratulations to the three winning
teams.
Your innovative solutions will make a
powerful impact and
will help drive real world change
through UNICEF's mission.
And then moving on fromtoday till the end
of the week at the OSPO forgood
we'll continue
the dialogue that started three years ago.
We'll dive intohow we can build more
effective government OSPOs
explore the dynamic relationship
between open source andartificial
intelligence anddiscuss how open source and
DPIs can
reinforce each other.
And tomorrow on DPI Day,we will work to
better connect the open source and
DPI communities
and ecosystems.
We will help align initiatives at the
global level andensure that
DPI projects actively
contribute to the implementation of the
global digital compact.
Now I will wrap up by showing how this
community is connecting to the broader
mission of the
United Nations andthe Office forDigital
and
Emerging Technologies at a critical
juncture
when we are in the midst of a UN80
moment,reform,renewal
rejuvenation on the 80th anniversary
of the UN. So I will mention a couple of
critical points.
First the UN is not only a space for
governments, it is a space for all stakeholders.
We cannot reinvent ourselves if we do not
move to this broader notion of
multi-stakeholder
collaboration.
Our mission,therefore
in the technology sector has two advanced
inclusive multi-stakeholder
cooperation that serves everyone.
In the same spirit,the global digital
compact is not only forgovernments
it is a north
star forall actors in the digital ecosystem,for
everyone in this room,technologies
policymakers
and advocates.
And open source is explicitly recognized
in the digital compact,open AI models as
well
as open access to training data and
compute resources.
So this reflects a clear understanding by
UN member states of open source as
the foundation
of digital transformation.
All of you in this room can support this
vision
can support our mission of implementing
the
GDC.
The GDC is open for endorsement by any
stakeholder from civil society, to academia, to
the private sector, to the developer
community.
Even individuals can endorse it.
We invite you all to take part in it, go to
the UN Global Digital Compact website and
endorse the GDC and join this
implementation community.
So thank you. At the end of the day, this
event is community driven.
I think Omar and the team lost sight of what
was happening around this week, and loss
of control is a good thing.
So we are having some moments of
serendipity, of discovery, of connection.
That is often hard to imagine in our crazy
world.
So thank you all.
Many of you have traveled from different
parts of the world, made the time, contributed
your own resources to be here.
Thank you to the panelists for contributing
the available insights, the mentors of UN
takeover, the moderators and the session
organizers whose efforts have shaped such a
rich and thoughtful program.
Enjoy. Thank you.
As mentioned, we had those very exciting two
days where there was -- it wasn't in this
-- second day was in this room, the first
day was in the room, and there was a lot of
action between 100 plus people WHO were
creating things for us.
So we have a short video, summarizing the
two days, that we can start our panel.
We have a lot of work to do.
And how much time we sort of wasted, and
how much I think that we learned.
Thank you for all everybody WHO worked
with two days with us here.
So, now it's time for our first panel of
the day.
So the first panel is about how they did
it, a look behind newly launched Ospos.
We're very excited.
There's a very special panel forus
becausewe're going to have civil society
academia
private sector and government.
Come and share with us some of their lessons
learned, what worked, what didn't work.
And forthat,I'm very happy to call on our
moderator,Satikko Muto
WHO's the chairwoman
of the Open Forum Europe and senior researcher
at the Research Institute of Sweden.
Satikko. [ Applause ]
>> Thank you, Omar, losing control can be
a good thing, it's a good reminder.
Especially since Omar,you just took my
line about,you know
I was going to ask the audience
WHO was here two years ago and talk about
the excitement of being here for a third
time and, you know, there's also going to
be a few other things.
So there are,you know
through a few sort of curve vaults to me
at the end this morning.
But, you know, losing control can be a
good thing.
That's a nice message.
I want to thank Muto, Satikko, and Omar
and everybody in the team also.
I'm sure I'm not the first, nor the last
WHO's going to do this, but, you know, putting
together this event and collaborating with
you guys over the last couple of years has
been a real pleasure. And, you know, just
let's do that instead.
Round of applause.
And it's not just this event, it's, I know
that you are having, you know, a sustained
effort towards promoting the adoption of
open source across the UN system.
And I think it makes a difference.
And it's really with
the global open source principles is also
going beyond the UN system.
And I think that's nice to see.
So we,it's expanded to a week of
events,but this conference,the Ospus for
Good Conference
that was the original event.
And I've been asked a few times this week
why we are calling it the Ospus for
Good and
not just the open source for good
conference.
And I think asthe Undersecretary
and I was told this morning not to say his
excellency
that's another one,there's apparently,you
know
I thought I was doing the right thing
but no,it's an Undersecretary General,Amadeep
Gill,reminded us this morning that
the idea
was to sort of harness the excitement
thatwe got fromthis conference
but really thinking
about what do we do starting Monday
wheneverybody,you know
is done taking the selfies and
posting on LinkedIn and everything like
that.
How do we, you know, harness this excitement
so that next year when we come back, we have
some tangible results.
And the way to do thatis throughthe
institutionalization of open source practice
throughan OSPO.
That's not necessarily called an OSPO,although
naming it something like thathelps
withthe
sort of collaborative aspects of, and the
outward facing aspects of an OSPO.
It makes it possible for
newcomers to identify sort of a natural
point of contact in order
to learn from and to start a
collaboration.
So research carried out by colleagues at
RISE,but also by the Linux Foundation
for example
it consistently shows that
having such a construct is really key to
translating some of the potential
of open source and open collaboration into
something tangible and sustainable.
Again, having people WHO, it's their job on
Monday to take the learnings from today and
really make that work for their organization,
but also potentially to make that work for
the greater good.
So, I think, you know, we kept the name OSPO
for good, even though we're talking about
all things open source, and that's, so
that's key.
I want to really hammer thathome,that it's
not just about
this high-level endorsements
although those things are important,the
political signaling is important
it gives support to
those people WHO have, as their day job,
to further open source in the organization.
But it's about learning how they actually
did it.
I've also had some comments about the title
of the panel, but, you know, apparently that
was, I hope we can deliver on that,
anyway, how they did it, behind the scenes.
Just again, before I invite my panelists
on stage, something that the Undersecretary
General Gil just mentioned about the global
digital compact, it's about this need for
a wider collaboration.
And again,I think thatOSPO's thatstarted
out in,sort of,in big
inside big tech companies
but now is also being established in
education and increasingly in government.
It's through these, OSPO's, that we can have
a chance, I think, to truly collaborate, not
just between governments, but between
different stakeholders.
And so,very pleased to introduce my
panelists to the stage
and maybe save the applause for
you know, when everybody is on the stage,
otherwise, I don't know what to come in with
the next speaker.
So, I'm going to present Sayid Shodari from
Carnegie Mellon University, where he's the
Associate Dean for Digital Infrastructure
and Director of OSPO.
Yes. Nithya, Nithya Ruff, Head of OSPO at
Amazon.
I have Bastian Gary, WHO is not sitting
here.
Yes, you're supposed to be over here.
That's all right, yeah. Okay.
Who's the head of the free software unit
in the French inter-ministerial directorate
for digital affairs, Dina for short.
Yes. I have also Avni, Avni Khatri.
It's not a completely accessible space.
Avni. You can manage senior director
education at GitHub.
And finally,Richard Givers,Head of Service
Design andDelivery
Presidency of the Republic
of South Africa.
So,we have representatives fromOSPO's,from
academia,government
and the private sector.
Now, I think we are meant to introduce a
collaborative, interactive element.
We have an audience poll.
Yes, that's working.
It's a very inspiring space,but it's not
one that's easily,you know
it doesn't necessarily
open up for interaction, but we're going to
try also with some questions from the floor
at the end.
Please think about what you want to ask
and get ready while I get up on the stage.
Thank you. [ Pause ] So, the question is
about inspiration.
It's about what you can learn from how
others have set up in OSPO.
And I'm going to have an introductory round
where I'll ask the panelists just to give
a short background on the origins of their
OSPO, really focusing on sort of what was
the motivating factors andalso maybe
politically what sort of
what was the winning argument
what was,you know
what were decision makers trying to
achieve by establishing an OSPO.
So, I'm going to start, and maybe then you
can see here the audience thinks that, okay,
it's about being inspired but also adapting
to local conditions, a local context.
So, see, if you start and we'll go in this
direction, I'll just sort of, yeah.
Thank you. Thank you, Sachiko, and thank
you to the organizers of the event.
It's really a privilege to be here.
The origin story at Carnegie Mellon was
that
we realized software is an essential
primary
university result or output,and then it
fosters the research,education
and social impact
mission of the university.
The second realization is that the latest
estimates are that 96% of all software has
open source components in it, and that 80%
is released as open source.
So, if I ask a university researcher, do you
care about open source software, they might
say no,but if I ask do you care
aboutresearch,education,and social impact,of course
they'll
say yes.
So,making that
connection was a key argument in realizing
the value of open source software.
It's also a realization that
open source is playing a key role in newer
forms of output
to results of universities, such as open
source hardware or open source AI.
As Sachiko mentioned,the creation of the
OSPO formalized our strategy and
our implementation
of open source within the university.
We act as a community convener, a clearing
house, a center of competency that allows
us to better
identify,manage,use,share,modify
and reuse software to achieve our
university
mission and goals.
This had the effect of activating the
entire university,faculty,administrators
students
all the college divisions,administrative
offices,research offices
technology transfer.
That has been incredibly important as
we move forward in trying to build this
community
trying to build a culture,and trying to
advance the work of the OSPO as
it supports the university's
mission.
I would be remiss if I didn't mention that
part of our origin story was a generous
grant
from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation.
And in fact, the Sloan Foundation has
given multiple awards to U.
S.
University OSPO's,
and we formed intoa network called the
Consortium of University and
Research Institution OSPO's.
We now have our first members fromEurope
aswell WHO
are not directly funded by the Sloan
Foundation. And as of yesterday, I'm told
we have 25 members in this network.
Several of my colleagues from the other
university OSPO's are in attendance today.
I would encourage you to reach out to them
andask them abouttheir origin story as
well.
Thank you. Thank you, Said.
I know we had a prep call and this -- one
thing that Said you mentioned about this need
to link your mission to the overall
mission of the institution that
you're working for
is really important.
That's something that you mentioned also,
Nithya, but I'll let you introduce your work
at Amazon OSPO.
Thank you, Satikou, and thank you, Omar,
and the United Nations for inviting us here.
I lead the OSPO at Amazon, which includes
all of Amazon, the AWS portion as well as our
stores, devices, and other groups.
And the OSPO at Amazon started back in
early 2004,2007,when we realized that
open source
was such an important element of how we
build innovation for our customers.
And our customers wanted us to be more
open source forward as well.
And with all this in mind, we started the
OSPO to first focus on the compliance side
of things because most organizations are
very focused on being law-abiding, complying
with licenses, making sure that our builders
know how to use open source and how to do
it correctly. So that's how it got
started.
And then in 2017,we started another aspect
of our open source program with
the open source
strategy and marketing team.
And that team's job was to engage with open
source communities, to contribute back to
open source communities financially, as well
as through code and through engagement, and
to really talk about open source more
broadly and promote open source.
The driving motivation,often foran
OSPO,starts withcompliance but
then moves to engagement
and moves to really very intentional
structured processes and
mechanisms around open source.
Because that's the way, as Satchiko put it,
you institutionalize practices around open
source. You institutionalize open source.
It's very important to have an organization
thatwakes up in the morning and
thinks about
open source.
This,in the last 10 years,has been very
gratifying aswe continue to give back
as we continue
to engage, as we continue to work in open
source.
We have a long way to go, but I think it's
been a gradual improvement and increase in
how we work with open source.
Thank you, Nithya. A few things there.
I think we can also come back to, I'm sure,
has to do with also this, that the demand
came from your customers.
I thought that's interesting.
Also,of course,you mentioned this kind of
maturity of engagement andhow that
progresses.
I think those are probably common themes
for a lot of organizations.
I'm European, so I think of all the
panelists on the stage.
I'm most familiar,actually,with the work
thatyou've been doing in France
Deanum Bastian
but I think, and we talked about newly
formed Ospus.
You've been around for a little while, so
you can talk a little bit more about having
been established for a few years, but start
from the beginning, and thank you, Bastian.
Thank you, Sashiko. Thank you for having
me.
It's a real privilege.
Free software is in the French public
administration since 25 years.
Big procurement has been active.
Ministries know how to procure free
software for a long time now.
Then, eight years ago, we started to build
this Blue Hats community that is the free
software activist from ministries, public
agencies WHO wants to share their enthusiasm
about free software and open source in
general, and wants to share skills.
But it's only in 2021 thatwe started
officially this Ospus,and the origin is because
of the
civil society. It's not just an idea that
we had within the administration.
We started to learn aboutprivate sector
Ospus,got interested in that
trying to understand
what it was about, but it's only the civil
society WHO told us, "You need to do that, "
because there was a sense at the time
thatthe department responsible for
open data was
all about open source, but it was like
everyone is in charge, and no one is in charge.
So the civil society told us, "You need to
organize.
You need to institutionalize this."
And we did.
It was aboutthree things aboutusing free
software
but also contributing to free software
and producing new free software, that's
what we do for the last few years.
For example, this morning, we got docs, an
alternative to Google Docs, registered within
the DPGA,and that's the proof that
we can put energy on producing new
interesting free
software, something that we do with our
German friends.
Use,contribute,and produce new free software
payload to the needs of civil servants
and
we did this in three different ways for
the legal aspects.
Of course, compliance comes first.
The technical aspects, because you need to
prove that open source can be state of the
arts when you address the civil servants
needs.
And also,people aspects,open source is
aboutsharing,sharing the knowledge
and building
this community. And what the OSPO brought
us is connections with other Ospos.
That's key. Last year, Marcus Richter told
something very interesting.
He said, "No, OSPO is an island, and I would
like to reiterate that thanks to the denium
OSPO, we were able to build partnership
with other ministries."
So now we are stimulating a network of
Ospos in different ministries.
We were also able to build partnerships
withoutside actors,foundations,for example
the
software heritage foundations, the Eclipse
Foundation and others.
And we are here to learn from other Ospos.
We are very modest.
We don't pretend that we are doing the right
thing in everything we do, but we want to
learn from other Ospos, and that's the key
aspect of this institutionalization.
Thank you Bastian, yes, my idea is that we
give this sort of first an origin story, and
then we'll talk aboutthe internal
challenges
and then also we'll be able to go back a
little
bit to focus on the external and
collaborative aspects.
But thank you very much, Avni, back to
private sector OSPO.
Thank you,all right,thank you,Satchiko,Omar,and
the UN forinviting us here and
hosting.
So excited to be on the panel today and be
with you all.
So GitHub,while GitHub has always had open
source activities andadvocates
we formalized
our OSPO after the Microsoft acquisition
to mature our open source practices, right?
And GitHub moved from
having these ad hoc type activities to a
structured program managing
similar to what Bastian just said,really
about
inbound consumption of tens of thousands
of open source packages, managing the
release of GitHub's own open source packages.
And then what I think is one of the, like,
just the wonderfulness of open source, which
is really the outreach to maintainers,external
Ospos,and other organizations
and really
supporting the community and collaboration
that we have.
And our drivers for creating the OSPO were
really, we want to, like, make sure that we're
compliant with the legal obligations of
the open source dependencies that we use.
We want to enforce,like,security community
anddigital best practices for
the open source
that we release and then serve as internal
experts and connectors for open source for
all levels of the organization, right?
I think an organization that can live and
breathe open source be a source of knowledge
and wealth for, like, other developers and
others in an organization really can, like,
basically help the open source communities
blossom worldwide and
really encourage more
international collaboration from,and I
think just fromGitHub's perspective
we want to
follow the best practices that we espouse
as the host of so many open source projects,
right?
From an EDU lens,one of the data thatwe
see is that
a lot of students are very interested
in contributing to open source projects,
but just don't know how to.
And I think thatOspos can serve asthat
bastion where
people can come to -- no pun intended
but wherepeople can come to andbe a hub
whereit's like a fountain of knowledge for
people
just getting started in their developer
journey.
>> I can make the connection before between
Bastion and Bastion, but now I'll see you,
Bastion,in a different,you know,in a
different light asa bastion of,you know
OSPO expertise.
I mean, it's great.
You mentioned, actually, quite a few functions
that an OSPO can have, and I think, again,
going back to sort of what the audience
said is thatthere is,you know
you can be inspired
but then also adapt to needs.
And I think maybe not every OSPO will feel
or have as
their mandate to sort of have all
these functions,but I guess it's a kind of
-- andmaybe in some organizations
you start
having a focus on one function.
This is what you also mentioned,Nithya,about
sort of starting out withcompliance
more
legal compliance.
And maybe,you know,this is a bit different
fromif you come from
the public sector potentially.
The driving force might be different, but
then there is all these -- all the things
that can also happen as you mature as an
organization using open source.
So finally,you know,last butnot
least,Richard Givers,I had to ask about
the pronunciation.
I don't know if it is a French,Bastia,how
you would pronounce that,but I was into
sort
of, is that a French name?
Then I would say something like Giver, or
something like this, but it's Givers.
Richard Givers, a newly formed OSPO in
South Africa.
Thanks. >> Thank you so much.
And also, I just wanted to express my
thanks for having us on the panel today.
So in South Africa, we didn't start with
an OSPO.
We started with the crisis of trust, so the
driving force, you mentioned, I think, was
very different.
The pandemic exposed a lot of deep gaps in
our ability to provide services
especially
digital services, our ability to know WHO
people were, validate WHO they were, be able
to give them crucial social protection.
And so coming out of that experience, our
presidency alongside our digital ministry,
DCT and national treasury created a
digital transformation road map.
I think it's the ninth one we've had in
the last couple of years.
But one that
certainly reflects what is an emerging
South Africa 2.0 under a government
of national unity.
Within the road map, we focused on creating
a digital services unit that acts like an
OSPO inside government and is coordinated
by an departmental working group, which is
a group of director generals that reports
to an intimate ministerial committee.
I'm new in the government space coming out
of civil society myself, so there's a lot
of words there. But it's quite interesting
to be at this point of formation.
We've done somuch in the last two years
and
in some ways we haven't done anything yet.
And soI think what we're looking to do is
form this modular civic-friendly
DPR-focused
OSPO that's had I not been on a part of
the gathering last year
maybe you wouldn't have
understood as much as of how powerful the
OSPO framing can be and the needs could be.
So as a delivery unit inside the presidency,
our main motivation is clearly to provide
South Africans with services that can
improve their livelihoods.
So our motivations are sovereignty, trust
and inclusion, which is a very interesting
framing becauseit means thatin digital
identity andpayments anddata exchange and
the ability
to provide trusted channels of government
services
our motivation very much is understanding
how to leverage open modular principles
and tools.
And I know we have DPGs in the room, DPGA
was mentioned and dial.
So understanding how we africanize open
products in a way that
we are able to implement short-term
delivery but also long-term sustainability
in what we do.
Our main andcore focus at the beginning of
our journey is to provide that
social protection
to turn around our social protection
ecosystem andmake sure thatpeople get pensions
child
grants,universal protection andunderstanding
how we can leverage DPIs and
especially open
source TPI's as
a delivery unit coordinates the development
of these in governmental communities
in order to provide the social protection
butalso form linkages intothe economy
economic
development and jobs.
And I think that's what's really
interesting here,you know
some of my fellow panelists
the live, breathe, open source.
I think we're in a culture and we'll get into
it later in the panel where understanding
how to hold this contested space is very
interesting.
Our job asa government OSPO is to be able
to not fit one user perfectly but
to be able
to hold a contested space of people
thatneed,have different needs in a common
in a commons.
And soa lot of the journey of the last two
years has been a lot of consultation
a lot
of trying to hold those contested needs or
those sort of differing needs in the
space
and design an OSPO that can deliver into
that space.
I think also just I believe not certainly
not frompersonal background but
from representation.
I'm the only panelist that's global
majority based.
And so
I think there's also an interesting space
in this OSPO DPI space around stacks.
Everyone's got their stack in your stack,
your stack.
What is the Africa stack?
And I think a lot of what our unit is
trying to understand is not to build another
sort
of intervention that tries to like build a
kingdom.
But how we can start to learn fromand
certainly in the room and
outside of the room incredible
OSPO driven DPI interventions and the rest
of the continent.
And how we can start to take digital public
goods and turn them and Africanize them.
And I think like one of the most important
things with that close is that we believe
open source working in the openness, it
can't be an afterthought.
It has to be our foundation andsee that
community across the continent has to be
our foundation.
And so where we go from there I think is
going to be quite interesting.
Thank you. Thank you, Richard.
Thank you for bringing in the global
majority.
And also I think it's interesting for
me how open source can also be part of
this need
for a government to be more transparent.
And sothat's more like a part of an open
government approach to increase trust for
the
government. I think that makes sense, more
sense in some places than others.
So I think it's more of a driving force.
Interesting forme if somebody's been in
open source andpolicy since 2007 is that
nobody
mentions cost saving.
And I think that's a really interesting
development on just how we have moved on I
think when
our conversations around open source it's
more about,truly aboutinnovation
transparency
other issues. So I think that's really
nice.
I just want to have a question because I
don't know if it's a lack of experience or
the inability to learn from experience.
I didn't bring any water.
Also I don't have a clock.
So I want to point me in the direction.
Is there anywhere I thought maybe on the
screen?
Just want to make sure, okay, thank you,
just so you know.
We're good. Oh it's there.
Thank you Said.
It's my job and it's an important part of
being able to fulfill that function.
So that's good.
We're going to move, as I said, towards
focusing on this internal functioning of OSPO.
And we're going to have another audience
poll whichasked aboutchallenges that
an organization
might have in working with open source.
And I think here maybe we can, oh, we can
skip that, Eileen, thank you.
No I think, but we can take that in the
panel.
So it's about sort of maybe talking first,
I will start with this question to the sort
of non-private sector.
So academia and government talking a
little bit about institutional challenges.
What sort of,how do you navigate the
particular institutional setup and
were there some sort
of critical decisions early on that
allowed you to prevail in your mission?
And I think we can also talk abouthere
this notion of not just challenges but
perceived
challenges, which translates into a
challenge anyway you have to overcome.
So I don't know if you want to go in the
same order,Said you can start talking about
some
challenges that you face, an overcome.
I'll be happy to,and I'll focus on what
might be an overarching challenge
which I think
will be common to OSPO's no matter the
context,I'd be eager to hear from
my panelists about
this.
And thatis culture
is how do you change the culture of an
institution toward the norms
of open source, particularly
collaboration?
And I don't think anyone should be
surprised thatwalking into
a faculty member's office
or senior administrator's office is saying
hello
I'm here to change the culture of the
university is not a good idea.
So it has to be done in a much more
pervasive, systematic, continuous manner.
And we talked aboutthe maturity stages of
an OSPO andI think when
I arrived at Carnegie
Mellon,not surprisingly,it was the
advocates,the champions of open source WHO
immediately
said this is wonderful, we have an OSPO, how
can we work with you, how can we help you?
But that's not enough.
And I think what we've learned is we need
to have an exponential growth of those
champions
and advocates.
So while we started with that early wave of
adopters WHO were very eager to work with
us had projects already in place where
they said are these right licenses or
these right
engineering practices and so on, governance
models and so on, we now have them acting
as ambassadors to other faculty students
and administrators.
And that's where the exponential effect is
happening.
So we now have faculty and students reaching
out to us WHO we've never met, we've never
spoken with. And I think that's an
important inflection point.
I'm always tempted to say how did you find
out aboutme,but that
seems a little strange.
So I don't do that, I just launch into how
can we help?
And then they in turn will go and reach
out to others.
So that's been a really important
challenge thatwe feel is essential as
a foundational
kind of bedrock type of challenge to
address.
And I just want to highlight Tom
Hughes,WHO is the community manager for
the OSPO team
he has done a wonderful job of this and
it wouldn't have been possible without his
help.
Thank you, Said.
I think you can ask that question, but it's
just, it's maybe how it's asked, right?
How do you find me?
And so maybe not, but you know, I think it's,
yeah, I'm curious to know how did you learn
about the work that we're doing?
Great. Bastian, and then Richard.
Yeah, so when we started the OSPO, my idea
was that free software shouldn't depend too
much on a few activists within the
organization.
And thathaving an OSPO would be,would let
me go away in one year and
let the organization
continue its road.
I failed, I'm still here, not for long,
but that's one of the challenges.
Like you depend on key people WHO know the
ropes about free software and you have to
pass that knowledge.
So one challenge is to really focus on the
community aspects of it.
And one key thing thatwe did thatwas
that we realized now is useful is this
Blue Hats
community because Blue Hats is in every
ministry, it's not just DeNub.
So whenDeNub questioned the utility of the
OSPO
when you had the whole Blue Hats community
say, well, keep that in place, please, because
we need this to get support, we need this
to get someone organized webinars on open
source and so on.
So yeah,listens learned is build the
community
find the open source enthusiasts in every
local public agency and tell them they are
not so lonely that I think they are.
Another challenge is to,because you are an
administration
there is the risk of creating
something very bureaucratic that believes
it can ask for more money just to continue
to exist without any impact.
So there is pressure so
that you can prove you have some impact in
terms of new software
develop, new usage, economy, like how much
money do you spare.
But then if you try to do this,you forget
aboutlong-term investment
like maintenance
like how do you have an exit strategy for
the software you produce?
And building those strategies requires
long-term view.
So you find yourself always trying to find
the right trade-offs between short-term
impact
and visibility of what you do so
that people you give you money continue to
nurture your
efforts. And this long-term view of how do
you invest in civil servants?
How do you invest in the private companies
that
produce this great open source software
that you are using?
How do you also invest in those strategies
that makes, that goes from a free software
that is just some repository somewhere,two
engagement witha community that
is sustainable?
So OSPO is very bureaucratic,it's an
institution,it's made so
that it can survive people WHO
built it and it's good.
But we can use it becauseit's free
software,we can use it andwe should use it as
a way
to de-brokrotize, to fight bureaucracy.
Not in some stupid way,but in some very
human way andvery with
a long-term view of what
we're doing for the public good.
Thank you, Bastianne, we heard about culture
and community and I think it's interesting
how that's not in opposition to
institutionalizing things
but in fact having the institution
to support a sustained,how can I say
sustained effort to grow a new culture or
to build community.
So the institution sort of enables that, I
think that's quite interesting because we
sometimes think thateither there's the
culture community or there are institutions
but in
fact the institution is there with an intent
to build and support a change of culture.
Richard,you're at the start of the
process,so what are you thinking about
those things?
Thank you, Sticker.
I think Said and Bastianne took all my
talking points, which is perfect.
That happens, but losing control.
But also validation and it's nice when
someone else does the work for you.
I think culture in government globally is
a challenge and
South Africa is no different
to that. So there is a lot of fear around
losing control, actually.
There's a lot of fear of taking on risk in
eating policy, Jennifer Poco wrote a very
good blog on why it's so comfortable for
government to do project thinking instead of
product thinking.
And to the points of open source andI
suppose why it's better to have someone else
some
vendor outside build something for you and
deliver it's early outside of you.
And a lot of it has to do withthe way
thatwe measure costs
the time frames we measure
cost in, non-economic costs that we don't
take into account and risk.
And soin the current way thatwe exist in
South Africa
we aren't good like many governments
or understand how to procure open source,
work with open source, think in a product
mindset and
we're happy to accept the exponential
costs of modernizing platforms every five
years or whatever it is, however it
happens.
And I think there's also a sense of within
government not wanting to make mistakes.
We don't understand very well how to be
proactive in a conversation andopen sothat
whenwe
make mistakes, we make them in the open
and together.
And soI think a lot of the ways we're
looking at dealing withthis and
to say we've started
at this level recently is true but to say
that it's not true that they haven't been
in very intensive and significant projects
and products that have been in incorporated
national governments in open source
from open source community over the last
five years
and a lot of momentum that's being
collated by our team.
And I think a lot of it comes down to
value exchange.
So not expecting,so doing the work for
public servants to be able to understand
what their
incentives are andunderstanding how to map
the outcomes to the things that
motivate people.
I don't think anyone should have to be put
in a, you know, any civil servants should
have to put in a place where their job is
on the line because they're taking a risk
on open source.
I think asan open source community andas
teams like myself
we need to build an understanding
of what value they need, what they need to
be able to feel comfortable to adopt open
product thinking, those sorts of things.
I think also it's abouttaking,you
know,using prototypes andareas that
are less contentious
to show new ways of doing things.
And part of my experience has been doing
thatover the last 10 years,I think
and bringing
that into government is going to be
important.
And then I think principles andvalues,you
know
we have been incorporating the DPI
safeguards
from the UN into our work.
I think flagging alignment with African union
and fill out African partners, global, you
know, ecosystems like the UN on open source
principles, giving a lot of steering that
these things are possible and done and not
just done in global minority communities,
but that there is a way that we can start
to build capability within our context.
I think just to finish,a lot of the
challenge that
we face is we're not knowledgeable buyers
of technology necessarily,and this might
be a common thing for
governments everywhere.
And so we get very excited about the tech,
and I don't really ascribe to the commonly
said thing that it's not about the tech
because I think it is about the technology.
But I think it's about the way that the
culture around the technology exists.
And if we're going to meaningfully
africanize andbuild a community that
can contribute
and support to DPGs and other open source
systems, that has to be a very intentional
intervention that's supported with skills
and mentoring and building opportunities for
communities to develop, I think that
governance has to be looked at.
So we have this in our roadmap.
We have this house, consultants love
houses that sort of build up to a vision.
And on the left,there's all of the digital
identity andwallets
and that's what everyone's
excited about.
But actually, I think what's going to be a
make or break for us in the public sector
as per environment is the right-hand side
of it, which is governance, our ability to
work across government,our ability to
build capability locally that
starts to bring tech
jobs back into the country after many years
of sending them out, and also working with
non-governmental communities and
understanding how much we can actually
adopt if we get our
mechanisms right. Thank you, Richard.
Also mentioning, of course, the pre-OSPO
journey, which I think there probably should
be some kind of collaboration around that
as well.
I can foresee that
an outcome of this could be sort of those
governments or those representatives
WHO are considering or are close to it.
That's also an interesting network that we
can support, I think.
How do you get to the OSPO that stage?
Bastia already mentioned this need to show
that you have an impact, and I think that
that's important in any organization, but
I guess, especially in the private sector,
it's not enough to say that you're doing
something for the greater good.
How do you make sure that you align those
pressures that you have to show that you're
creating value forAmazon withthe broader
goals of innovation andpublic good
et cetera.
Yeah, please. Thank you, Sachiko.
I think it's so important for an OSPO to not
live in isolation, but to be very aligned
with the goals of the organization andto
also understand the role that
open source plays
in the organization and how to support
that role.
For Amazon, for example, customers, we are
customer-obsessed.
We care deeply about what our customers
want.
So aligning with customer requirements for
open source, engagement with open source,
managed open source services, et cetera,
is so important.
So that was one of the drivers that we
wanted to align with.
The second is our developers across the
company are innovating really fast on behalf
of customers
and they use a lot of open source.
So we needed to acknowledge the fact that
open source was important to our innovation
journey androadmap,and thatwe need to
remove a lot of the friction in use and
contribution
and release of open source across the
company.
So making our developers or builders
successful was an extremely important thing.
The third thing was the fact thatwe live
in a global world
and we live in a world that
is using open source in very strategic
ways,and we wanted to be part of that
community.
We wanted to support sustaining open
source across the world
moving open source forward
contributing back to open source.
It's not only a selfish goal,it's a
business continuity goal,for example
but it's also
a goal of being a connected organization
with the world at large.
And, you know, as Said mentioned, culture
and language, there is a culture always in
a company or an organization,and there's
an open source culture
which is very different.
So I often think of myself and the OSPO as
a bridge builder, building bridges from the
internal OSPO language and
the Amazon language to the language of the
open source community
and translating back and forth.
And speaking in the Amazon business
language is the way to show impact
is to demonstrate
that we are making a bottom line impact
we are moving the needle in terms of the
speed
of innovation, we are moving the needle in
terms of how customers perceive us and our
open source solutions.
So we have to demonstrate our business
impact in the language of the organization.
So that's how we've been working on it.
Yeah. And that needs to be adapted again,
so, you know, I just want to, yeah, Abni?
Thanks, San Chico.
I think due to GitHub's role in, the OSPO's
role in managing our inbound consumption
of open source, I think similar to what Nithya
was just saying about innovation, right?
We're hyper aware by looking at what our
developers are using
we're hyper aware of new technologies
platforms,and languages encountered as
teams on board to new open source
dependencies.
And we often get a first look, right?
So I think whenyou think of business
impact
I think one thing we are is an early
indicator
or providing a provider of signals asto
what direction is technology going
where is innovation
heading?
And it's a transparent way for,you
know,institutions to understand where
our developers
moving to, very early on, right?
So, and I think one of the ways that OSPO's
can help build support is by, like, helping
solve problems andcoming up withsolutions
or alternatives and
not just being the group
that says no, right?
Or like, hey, you can't use this, can't,
you know, don't use that.
But really,like
thinking of creative solutions to finding
pathways to support developers
within community.
When we think of, like, impact beyond the
company, right, I think GitHub, specifically,
like,I think one of the things that
you hear on this panel is the diversity
among OSPO's
right?
There's no one-size-fits-all, and in that
poll that was put up at the beginning, I think
one of the options was, like, how
important context is.
And I saw a lot of people selected that, I
think, almost 20%.
Selected, like, context is so important when
you're thinking about, like, setting up an
OSPO. And I felt, like, like, like, each
one of us, like, has our own challenges.
And while, like, we share, there are many
similarities, right, and I think you can learn
from any, I think there's also, they often
have different focuses, whether, like, we've
talked abouthere,like,consumption,creation,or,actually,the
community and
collaboration
aspect.
And whenI think,like,for GitHub,the GitHub
OSPO does some amazing work
like supporting
the GitHub secure open source fund
throughour sponsors program
and also maintainer month
to support, like, open source maintainers
and allowing people to learn from each other,
regardless of what type of OSPO or what
type of open source organization you come
from.
That's also the home of the majority of
the digital public goods.
And we partner withthe DPG Alliance to
improve,like
community management of open source
for good, from capacity building to
project discoverability.
So we're looking to learn fromeach cohort
and
looking always to improve the work we do.
Thank you.
So we're going to move on to the,sort of
external global collaboration aspect or
potential
of Ospos.
And we're going to speed up a little bit
here because
we want to have a chance also to bring
in some questions from the floor.
So I'm going to ask each one of you just
to,sort of
give an example of cross border or
cross-sector collaboration, just to, sort
of, give an example of that scene.
Well I will choose the UN hackathons.
So the OSPO at Carnegie Mellon is, in
fact, based in Pittsburgh.
But we have two global campuses.
One campus, CMU, Carnegie Mellon, Africa,
in Kigali, Rwanda.
And one in Doha, Qatar, Carnegie Mellon,
Qatar campus.
We just,earlier this month,hosted a
hackathon with
the UN in the reboot the Earth series.
And it included,not only students
andparticipants fromCarnegie Mellon,Africa
but also from
an African network called the Upansi
network.
So we had many participants from the
global majority.
And we are also planning an additional
reboot the Earth hackathon at CMU's campus in
Qatar
later this year.
One thing I will say is, we need different
messages for different audiences in terms
of how the value and importance of
collaboration.
And sometimes I found thatit's actually
important to say,don't think aboutit as
collaboration.
Think of it as your self-interest aligning
with someone else's self-interest.
And what I love about these UN hackathons,
as we saw in the video, is that everybody
there,at least one of their self-interest
is trying to make the world a better
place.
So you can get a lot of energy
andenthusiasm fromuniversities and
all of us to participate
in these hackathons. Really good point.
I think the energy in the room, it shows
also, I mean, something I often talk about,
is this need. We talk about the skills
gap, et cetera.
We had that LinkedIn, you know, side event
yesterday, and it was talking about the skills
gap. How do we attract more people into
contributing?
And one thing that really works is to not
just talk about technology, but to talk about
technology forsomething,then you attract a
wider audience andmore excitement
I think
as well. So that's a really good point.
Thank you.
I think you said it well, connecting it to
the problem that you're solving, right?
One of the big roles the hospital plays is
to be a connecting hub
connecting people inside
the company, but also connecting
organizations outside to the inside.
So very often we get questions from people
around the world WHO say, WHO should I work
with within Amazon on this particular
issue
whether it is sustainability or energy or
film industry, et cetera.
And so
we are able to then track down WHO's doing
open source work across the company and
connect them to that work.
But the other connection withthe outside
world that
I particularly love is a group called
todogroup.org.
And thatis an organization of
Ospos,frankly,both private sector Ospos
but also public
sector, universities, very similar to what
you're doing in Saeed, and it allows us to
learn from each other because we all don't
know everything and it allows us to problem
solve together, which is the essence of
open source, which is global collaboration.
How do we break down a problem together
rather than duplicate our work across
multiple problems?
So those are some of the areas thatI feel
we connect withthe outside world and
the global
world. Thank you.
Yeah, one example, I know you're doing
many things, but two is one.
One is the collaboration with Software
Heritage.
So we have five millions of civil
servants,we have many developers,teachers
researchers.
Where do they contribute?
What software do they contribute to?
And we could find out only by,we have many
platforms,GitLab,GitHub
many repositories
but we could only find these figures by
going to this platform agnostic project that
gather
all the source code.
And that's a collaboration becausesoftware
is not just software
it's also data if you
want insight aboutwhat your civil servants
are doing
then you need to go to this universal
archive.
And the second example is Docs withthe
German friends,again,Zendes and
Sarvak De Genci
which is that's an example of a product
thatsuddenly fits many needs and
we are excited
about making it sustainable.
Thanks, question.
I do think like for,I want to give one
example of GitHub where
we've been collaborating with
the World Health Organization since 2020,
both in helping strengthen the WHO's in our
source software development processes
aswell as
supporting the creation of their OSPO.
And one thing like we realized is like
they had over a hundred open source or they
have
over a hundred open source repositories by
different groups and one of their mandates
is making sure their open source ecosystem
is safe, reliable, well maintained.
And to ensure that they meet this mandate,
they needed like a measurable way to check
what like what was going on and really in
an automated fashion.
So we helped develop the open source
metrics dashboard,which is open source and
available
allowing them to see like license
compliance,but also like issues,discussions and
then
also like SLA, like how long does it take
to respond to an issue?
And this is available for any open source
project to use or open source organization
to use,really helping with
some of the overhead that's involved in
maintaining a large number
of open source repos. Thank you.
Richard. Yeah.
So I think from the start of this journey,
we've had a lot of collaboration from India
Brazil in their G20 journeys and
DPI journeys in terms of how they did its
guidance on lessons
learned from things like ad hire and picks
and others.
So I think that there's a very good strong
south to south collaboration going there.
And then just to put a shout out to how
useful the safeguards have been
the UN safeguards
and DPI have been in our process andhow
those in a political process and
a broader community
process as
you're setting up your terms of collaboration
or finding each other self-interests
how they can act asa steer to values
andmake sure that
when there is a lot of different
players to try and balance needs for, there
is this common set of values that you can
align on.
So I think just two examples of
one,obviously,drawing fromthis global ecosystem and
then
secondly,from very gracious andopen
learning fromIndian Brazil andothers
but particularly
those on our journey over the last two
years.
Thank you, Richard.
So you brought in again the global south
andcollaborating with
newly formed ospos across
the global south.
And also,of course,we heard fromthe French
OSPO,but Omar asked me also this week
introduced
me to tell me about this new OSPO that's
formed in Trinidad and Tobago.
And I had the opportunity to meet with
Craig Lamlal.
This yesterday? Yes, you're there.
I was scanning the room, you know, feeling
a loss of control.
But for those of you WHO were at the side
event yesterday, you heard from Craig.
Craig is a former member of the high-level
advisory board, the UN high-level advisory
board on AI and so you could hear his input
on the report that Odette and ILO has put
out.
And you are also one of the leads of the
Trinidad and Tobago OSPO and the executive
director of the AI Innovation Center.
If you just could share a little bit about
your journey and where you're at with the
formation of the Trinidad and Tobago OSPO,
that would be great.
Yes. Thank you very much.
I actually wrote a speech.
Oh, great. You have two minutes.
Sorry. I'll be quick. Ask Eileen.
Okay. All right. Okay.
So thank you for the floor and thank you
for this remarkable panel.
And as we have heard already, the OSPO's
model has evolved into a powerful force, not
just in the private sector, but increasingly
across public institutions and academia.
It reflects a shift in how we think about
innovation, collaboration, and sovereignty
in the digital age. Of course, you know
I'm big on sovereignty.
Today I am proud to share alongside my
colleagues and
with the valued financial support of the
European Commission
not only the establishment of an OSPO in
the Republic of Trinidad and
Tobago, but also one in the Republic of
Kenya.
These are not isolated initiatives
but backed by the leadership of the United
Nations Development
Program and the International
Telecommunications Union.
And our aim is very, very ambitious.
It is to create a replicable
scalable model toward a global network of
OSPO's across the
global south,joining andlearning fromthe
early adopters andthose WHO
are already paving
the way as we saw heard from this
remarkable panel.
Our Trinidad andTobago's and
Kenya's OSPO's are particularly unique in
the way they are
designed to serve the entire country
beyond the government.
Through collaborative,supportive,and service
to our national ministries,as well as
active
leadership outside of the government by
institutions such asmy own university
these OSPO's are
designed to amplify capacity of our local
tech communities throughadoption and
promotion
of open source.
We believe responsible, fast citizenship,
and stewardship efforts by these countries,
governments are a key component of a
modern day economic workforce development.
To all of you gathered here today
I invite you to join us after this
upcoming break in
Conference Room 9.
We will be hosting an open andengaging
discussion withour OSPO teams
and we are eager to share
this to learn andto build together withthe
broader open source community
and the many
OSPO's WHO have come before us.
Let's help ensure that this global effort
becomes a transformative one.
Thank you very much. Thank you, Craig.
So not just Trinidad and Tobago, but also
Kenya, and I think the expectation, the hope
is that when we come back next year, yes,
we're coming back next year, that we'll hear
about more examples of newly formed OSPO's
or OSPO's in the planning.
So we have time,I think,for one or two
questions fromthe floor,and just wanted to
again
go back to just the sort of,we had thatoriginal
question to the audience,it's about
sort
of how we can learn, but also how we have
to adapt to local context, et cetera.
So maybe that's an inspiration for a
question.
I have received a message, yes, you have
to press the button if you want to speak.
So WHO wants to speak? I saw over there,
yes, you have the floor.
Hello everyone, good afternoon, I'm so
glad to be here.
My name is Fatima Biola Jimobi, and I'm
representing a local NGO from Nigeria that is
focused on education
andtechnology,especially forthe visually and
the hearing impaired.
One major question that I would like to ask
is, what is the scalability of open source
when it comes to the global south, especially
in Nigeria and other African countries?
What are our collaborative opportunities,
and are there any funding opportunities for
small local NGOs on how we can either
participate or have our own hospitals moving
ahead?
Also, how we're able to reconcile DPIs and
our systems and cultures of government in
the global south? That's all in a
nutshell.
Yeah, a few questions.
I think, you know, choose one question, and
if you wanted to, is anybody want to ask the
answer? Two questions also about the
global south.
I mean,I think thatI really appreciate the
sustainability question
because I don't think
with any prejudice,the open source
archetype is definitely one that
people understand in
a global minority context.
And as someone WHO comes from African open
source community, I think it is definitely
sustainable
but I think it has to be a completely
different paradigm in terms of how we set
up teams, how we build organizations.
We just, at the moment, mostly in the context
of where we develop from, don't have the
ability to do the sort of open source dream,
hobbyist sort of contribution community.
And so I think a lot of it, what we do have
the real big opportunity in is that we have
to be sustainable very fast.
There's less safety nets, there's less
support.
And sowhere those succeed,they succeed
well,and I hope that
what we can start to do is
shine those lights brighter and so that
more funding is flowing to that.
And it speaks to what I mean
what I was saying earlier around the short
term versus long term
thinking,because short term,if I as
a government's delivering coordination
unit want to meet
my very pressing needs
my best thing to do is to get some
international donor to fund
a team and some other continent to deliver
something for us.
And then in the whole context of open
source andDPI andsovereignty
we really just replaced
it, one vendor for another.
And so a lot of the conversation is how we
both look to short term needs, but develop
capabilities and communities locally.
And the choices we make in terms of what,
in terms of an aspect, in terms of what we
engage with and what we invest in is
really critical.
And those sorts of frameworks is where we
need support from a global community.
When we make a choice around X-road,you
know,or open wallets or most support
what does
that really mean?
And how do we make sure that
we're not essentially in five years' time
in the same position
where we've lost our control of our core
stack?
Nithyan and Bastian, yes?
Quick thought, open source really is
founded on volunteerism.
And so you have a lot of mentors in this room
WHO are volunteers and WHO can be invited
to come start a community in your nation,
in your organization.
And the hackathon model is a great model
because in a short period of time, you can
have mentors teach a community and hand
them the tools to continue and sustain that.
One other element I will mention is
organizations like the Python Foundation have
things like
PiLadies andother smaller communities
thatare hyper-local andWHO get together and
teach
each other and grow from there and are
still connected to the bigger community.
So I would look at some of those ways of
growing awareness andstrength and
competency.
Use great advice and use the weak here to
make the connections, Bastian?
One of the first freedom you get with
free software is the freedom to adapt the
software
to the local needs andone of the first
needs is localization
translation in your own language.
For example, 17 years ago, I was working for
the one laptop per child project, I was in
high tea and we had to localize the
operating system, it was a challenge.
We were having a problem with one word and
I told my co-workers, Asian students, let's
check on the high Cien quail
Wikipedia,they love at me,they say,"Well
that's something
you think.
You in France that we have Wikipedia for
every country, every language, let's check."
And there was a high Cien quail Wikipedia
thatthey didn't even know about
this Wikipedia
and it was a new world.
We could get help from the local Wikimedia
community to translate this free software.
So I don't know aboutscalability
becausethat's aboutbusiness models
there are volunteers
but they are not just volunteers,there are
also companies and
there is a concern about
long-term maintenance for free software in
general and we should put effort on that.
But every free software is adaptable to
your local needs and that's very key.
Hi Fatima, thanks for your questions.
I think you also asked aboutfunding
forsmall hospitals and
I do think what the panel discussed
earlier may help whichis talking
abouttechnology forX,like technology for
a specific purpose
and figuring out how you can think about
your potential donors or your potential
funding
sources,what are they interested in,what
are their goals and
how do they align or agree
with the goals of the hospital thatyou're
forming,right,they can do that
may be helpful.
Thank you andI,you know,the funding
landscape is,you know,everybody,you know
it's always
asking aboutthe funding butI mean my
experience at least in Europe and
I think we heard that
you know thatTrinidad andTobago has
received some support from
the European Commission funding
and my impression is also that
funders increasingly are looking to favor
open source projects
and open source solutions so I think it's
something that is resonating more generally
with funders so yes.
We are going to wrap up this panel and I'm
going to ask each panelist just to give a
sort of final piece of advice for anybody
out there considering, you know, considering
an hospital is on that journey so one
sentence or close to it, closing.
You're not alone, seek out the resources and
networks that have been described here and
we're happy to have you join our effort.
I would say the founding team of an OSPO is
so important having people with experience
in open source and WHO can translate back
and forth between your organization and open
source is important and then mentor the
next generation.
Everyone these days is aboutsovereignty
andI think OSPO's
public sector OSPO shouldn't
be swallowed up by sovereignty.
We should find a balance between sovereignty
and freedom and also we started with some
friends to build the list of public sector
OSPO's so
if you have an OSPO in a government
in a local municipality like please join
us andwe will try to connect with
each other.
I would say don't forget
aboutdocumentation andtraining as
you build up your OSPO because
that is one way to essentially share
andbroaden your network and
then I think in this increasingly
virtual world I love these in-person
connections sothe hackathons and
the in-person events
will really help you build the bridges
fromyour OSPO to the work that
you're trying to
do and the impact that you're trying to
have.
Yeah those are brilliant.
I think our biggest principle is design
fortrust and
to steal the words of Richard Pope
from platform land, design the seams, don't
go for seamless design but design the seams,
show people how and where it comes from
and then you'll get them to follow you.
Thank you, nice final words.
Thank you andthank you to the panelists
please a round of applause or almost on
time.